HTML Documents
====

HTML is the *HyperText Markup Language*.

## HTML is markup

HTML is the HyperText Markup Language, in contrast to a plain text language
which only contains text, HTML marks up (think of red ink on a printed piece of
paper) the text content - in a sense stepping outside of the document to
describe itself.

HTML is still written using plain text, but embedded in the text in the form of
*tags* is additional text that contains information about the content of the
document. This additional text is a form of *metadata* that identifies features
of the content and specifies how it is organized and presented.

For example, the `p` tag identifies a portion of the text as a paragraph. The
`a` (anchor) tag says that some other bit of text should be treated like a link,
and the `ul` and `li` (unordered list and list item) tags in combination
instruct the browser to display a list. These tags don't belong to the
document's content, and the browser does not display them. Instead, tags are
instructions to a computer about how that content should be treated.

When creating an html document, always have in mind the content you want to
present. Then construct the html to accomodate that content.

## Structure of html tags

HTML is composed of tags, also commonly called elements. Tags can stand on their
own, contain text content, and contain other tags to form a hierarchical
structure known as a *tree*.

**Basic Tags**

A basic html tag opens with the tag name surrounded by `< >` characters and
closes with the tag name in `</ >` characters. Between the opening and closing
tags lies content:

        <tagname> ... content ... </tagname>

For example, the `p` tag establishes a paragraph of text with its content, and
the `div` tag sets aside a generic section on a page:

        <p>This is a paragraph of text</p>
        <div>This is a generic section on my page</div>

Some tags are *self-contained* and do not require the closing portion.
Self-contained tags do not have any content:

        <tagname>

For example, the `br` tag adds a linebreak to a page, and the `input` tag adds
an interactive input element :

        <br>
        <input>

**Comments**

There is a sort of comments tag that the browser will ignore but which you may
use to add notes to your html (most languages have comment syntax to allow for
documentation in the source code). Include comments inside the `<!-- -->`
characters:

        <!-- This is a note to myself and other devs which the browser will
          ignore -->

**Attributes**

HTML tags can include *attributes* that add information about the tag. Some
attributes are required while others are optional. Self-contained tags commonly
use attributes instead of content to specify their function.

An attribute appears in a tag as an `attr='value'` pair, or the attribute name
followed by an equal sign followed by its value in quotes. Single and double
quotes are both allowed, but use one or the other consistently (we will use
double quotes in this class):

        <tagname attr="value"> ... </tagname>

For example, the `a` tag requires the `href` attribute to specify its link
destination:

        <a href="http://google.com">link to google</a>

Similarly, the `input` tag requires the `type` attribute to identify what kind
of input it is:

        <input type="text">
        <input type="email">

A tag can have more than one attribute. Separate the attributes with a space.
`id` is commonly used to identify an element and `class` to assign it to a
stylistic category:

        <p id="main-content" class="post"> ... </p>

You may create your own attributes and store whatever you like in them. Custom
attributes commonly begin with the `data-` prefix to distinguish them from those
included in the html specification:

        <div data-person="David Bowie"> ... </div>

Tags can also have more than one value for a particular attribute. For example
a `div` tag will often have more than one class:

        <div class="col-md-2 col-sm-3 another-class"> ... </div>

**Hierarchy**

Tags contain other tags to build up the structure of a document. This is called
*nesting*. There are subtle rules that govern which tags can be nested in what
tags, largely concerning whether a tag is *inline* or *block* level (more
below). At this point, it's enough to know that a tag is included in another tag
just like normal text content is:

        <div>This is a div with plain text content</div>

        <div>
          <p>But this div has a paragraph in it</p>
          <p>And another paragraph!</p>
        </div>

It is custom to use spacing and linebreaks to separate parts of a document in
your text editor and indentation to reveal the structure of a document.

## HTML document

A *well-formed* HTML document must include certain tags. Every HTML document
begins with a `!DOCTYPE` declaration followed by the `html` tag, which includes
two sections, the `head` and the `body`.

        <!DOCTYPE html>
        <html>
          <head>
            ...
          </head>

          <body>
            ...
          </body>
        </html>

The head contains information about the document. It often includes the title,
links to stylesheets and javascript files, and other metadata. A browser does
not *render* the head's content in the page.

At a minimum include a title in the head:

        <head>
          <title>Homepage</title>
        </head>

The body contains all of a page's content that the browser will render. Include
text, images, tables, input elements and everything else here. A simple body
might include a heading and paragraph of text:

        <body>
          <h3>Homepage</h3>
          <p>Welcome to my homepage</p>
        </body>

So that the entire document looks like:

        <!DOCTYPE html>
        <html>
          <head>
            <title>Homepage</title>
          </head>

          <body>
            <h3>Homepage</h3>
            <p>Welcome to my homepage</p>
          </body>
        </html>

**Validator**

Valid html conforms to the html *specification*. Invalid html occurs, for
example, when you forget a closing tag, use quotes incorrectly, incorrectly nest
tags, or give multiple elements the same id. Invalid html doesn't mean that a
web browser will refuse to display your html document entirely. Browsers will
try to render invalid html correctly but may fail in unexpected ways.

Use the html validator to verify your web page code:
[Markup Validation Service](http://validator.w3.org/)

<!--- Include the Tim-Berners Lee wikipedia example Include information about
using Sublime Text --->

## Structure vs presentation

The latest html specification, html5, distinguishes between the structure and
the presentation of a document. Tags are meant to be semantic rather than
stylistic. That is, tags describe the meaning or function of content in a
document (its semantics or structure), not how it should look (its presentation
or style).

For example, use the paragraph tag `p` with a block of text because that bit of
text is in fact a paragraph and you are identifying it as such, not because you
want to add some extra spacing around the top and bottom of it. (`p` tags come
with defualt browser assigned spacing)

Previous versions of html such as html4 and xhtml did not make this distinction,
and to confuse matters, browsers render some tags with a distinct style.
Browsers typically render `strong` content in **bold** and `em` content in
*italics*  to emphasize it, for example. Though there are tags like `em` that
will give styling to html, we will not use them.

Do not rely on how tagged content appears in a browser by default. Different
browsers use different stylistic defaults, and it is possible to override the
style of any tag.  We'll learn how to use css for this in future chapters (by
using a `span` tag with a class of our choosing and styling of our choosing for
that class).

## Inline and block level elements

Tags belong to one of two kinds. There are *block* level elements and *inline*
elements. In some cases the two are combined for special effect.

Block level elements appear to occupy the entire horizontal space of the browser
page where they occur, even if their content doesn't actually require that
entire space. Block level elements block out other content, forcing it above and
below their own. `p` and `h1` tags are common block level elements. `div` is the
generic block level element with no default style.

Inline elements continue to render in line with their surrounding content while
identifying their own content differently and presenting it differently
according to style declarations. `strong` and `a` are common inline elements.
`span` is the generic inline element with no default style.

The relationship between block and inline elements is complex. Generally, block
level elements can contain other block level elements as well as inline
elements, but inline elements can only contain other inline elements.

        <!-- comment: divs can contain paragraphs and links -->

        <div>
          <p>A paragraph in a div</p>
          <a href="http://google.com">A link to google in a div</a>
        </div>

        <!-- comment: the strong tag can contain em and links -->

        <strong>
          <em>
            <a href="http://google.com">A strong, emphasized link to google
          </em>
        </strong>

Making the matter more complex, there is a hierarchy among block level elements.
Not all block level elements can contain every other block level element. For
example, a `div` may contain a `p`, but a `p` may not contain a `div`. Can a `p`
contain a `p`? Ask yourself, does it make sense for a paragraph to contain a
paragraph?

The rules for mixing block and inline level elements are subtle and learned
only with experience. In practice, browsers will let you do what you want and
fail gracefully when possible. Use the [Markup Validation
Service](http://validator.w3.org/) to be sure you are writing legal html.

## Basic tag reference

Following is a list of common tags and example usage. Refer to the Mozilla
Developer Network (MDN) for a complete listing of tags, organized by type:

[Block level elements]
(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Block-level_elements)

[Inline elements]
(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Inline_elemente)

### h1 ... h6

Headings for a portion of text. Like title, section and paragraph headers in a
document. Block level. `h1` is the highest level and typically appears the
largest, `h6` is the lowest level and often appears the smallest.

        <h1>Big Document Heading</1>

        <h3>Also an important section in my document</h3>

        <h6>A subsection in the document</h6>

### div

The generic block level element. Blocks off content without identifying it as a
paragraph. Add `id` and `class` attributes to give it style. Often contains
other elements.

        <div>Content I'd like to distinguish from the surrounding material</div>

        <div> <h3>A section in my document</h3> <p>Here's what that section
        talks about</p> </div>

### p

Identifies paragraphs of text. Block level. Often contains inline elements.

        <p>Some text in a short paragaph. But more than one sentence.</p> <p>Let
        me tell you about an <strong>awesome</strong> site: <a
        href="http://okcoders.com">OK Coders</a></p>

### strong

Emphasize a section of text. Inline. Typically rendered **bold** in browsers.

        Yeah but <strong>this text</strong> is bold

### em

Emphasize a section of text. Inline. Typically rendered *italicized* in
browsers.

        Oh yeah, well, <em>this text</em> is italicized!

### span

The generic inline level element. No style by default. Add `id` and `class`
attributes to give it style.

        <span class="red">Might appear red if the css is defined</span>

### a

The anchor tag, or all important link. Inline. Include the `href` attribute to
target a page. The text content will appear in the link style, often blue and
underlined by default:

        <a href="http://okcoders.com">Link to OK Coders</a>

### img

Add an image to a page. Self-contained. Inline, surprisingly, which results in
the line height of the surrounding text to grow to accomodate the image's
height. Include the `src` attribute to identify the image resource:

        <img src="https://i.imgur.com/IU0AZOp.jpg">

### ul, li

Displays an unordered list and its elements. Mixture of block and inline. For
example:

        <div> The recipe calls for: <ul> <li>Eggs</li> <li>Milk</li>
        <li>Butter</li> <li>Sugar</li> </ul> </div>

Looks like:

The recipe calls for

- eggs
- milk
- butter
- sugar

### form

Defines an input form. Block level. Include additional elements for the kind of
input required:

        <form> <!-- comment: add input elements --> </form>

### label, input

Input elements for forms and their labels. Inline. Input elements are
self-contained. Input includes text, dates, checkboxes and buttons. The `type`
attributes determines the kind of input:

        <form> <label>Name:</label> <input type="text">

                <label>Email:</label> <input type="email">

                <label>Password:</label> <input type="password"> </form>

Forms probably involve the most complex html. Refer to MDN for more information
about form input: [Input Elements at
MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/Input)
